The lab set up for learning about LDAP protocol will be discussed here.

The process from the conception of the idea to its implemtation is a process of maturation of thought in itself. The initial idea was to set up a simple LDAP server on the Linux PC I was using, interact with it via the commandline and capture the network traffic in Wireshark. When I actually got into the nuts and bolts of setting up the server, I realized that I would have to make changes to multiple config files locally. I had my reservations regarding that. For one, if I were to “reset” the lab, I would have to deal with so many config files again. Secondly, when I would be done with the lab, it is likely that I would miss out on reseting one of these files. That's where the idea of setting up an LDAP server in a Docker container seemed alluring.  

Starting with installing docker and testing out the hello command, I moved on to dowloading the LDAP container setup by osixia. Setting up the LDAP server was fairly straightforward. For the initial test run, I ran it via commandline itself. I was required to provide an “LDAP_ORGANIZATION” and “LDAP_DOMAIN” as parameters alongside a “LDAP_ADMIN_PASSWORD”. I had mapped the docker based LDAP server on port 389 to the same port on my local machine. With just a handful of parameters, the LDAP server was up and running. However, it did not have any significant data yet. At this point, the only meaningful command that could be run was “ldapwhoami”. Even though it was partially redundant, since the the response received would look exactly like the query parameters, executing it gave the satisfaction that the server was responding and hence live.

The next step was to add a few entries to the directory. I learnt that a LDIF file containing the details can be fed to the LDAP server via the “ldapadd” command. Such a file would enable adding multiple entries at once.  I manually typed out three entries to familiarize myself with the syntax of the LDIF file. The aforementioned “ldapadd” command was invoked to add the entries. With appropriate queries to the server, the newly uploaded data was received as response, validating the success of the operation.  It is worth mentionning  that supplying a modified LDIF file which contains any data that is already present in the LDAP server will be met with an error. I was elated to fire up Wireshark and repeat the queries to see the packets show up on the screen. This was a proof of concept of the complete setup.

This was the point where the idea matured from “setting up a LDAP server” to “setting up a LDAP lab”. The first step in this transition was a bash script that could set up the server and add some dummy entries into the directory. The script was designed to prompt the user to enter a password twice and if they matched, it would be used as the admin password for the LDAP server. In order to come up with meaningful data, I conjured up a fictitious software developement company called Neptune Software. This organization would have a CEO, a CTO, a CFO and a Sales Head as the top level managers and 50 other employees across three departments - engineering, finance and sales. While the LDIF with the managers was more practise in learning the LDIF syntax, typing one out for the 50 employees would have been an overkill. Instead, it was populated with entries genrated by a python script that would create unique names from two lists, one for the first names and the other for the last names. The employees would be assigned to random departments and for ease of setup, all employees would have the same password.

The “experiments” in the lab were to be script-driven. This was achieved through a two-script setup: a bash script to initialize and start up tshark to listen over port 389, call a python script that would perform the LDAP operations and finally stop the tshark capture and save the network traffic in a .pcap file. The two-script setup was designed with the intent to allow for choice in the experiment to run. Differnt python scripts defining varied sequences of operations could be crafted to interact with the server while leaving the traffic capture setup undisturbed.

Feeling proud of what I had been able to achieve in a day, I spent some time marvelling at the setup. The only honest way to do that was to tinker with it, run queries, analyse the results, test out assumptions and push the frontier of my knowledge further. Soon enough, I came across some glaring inconsistencies between the model in my head and the setup that had been built. For example, the heirarchy of the organization was clear in my head, however I was sure it was not communicated clearly via the LDIF files I had setup. I knew, that a milestone had been achieved yet it was far from over. The subsequent blogs will cover how the data was made cohesive and we would also analyze some of the network traffic to understand LDAP better by seeing it in action.

